---
layout: post
title: "What Makes a Data Scientist"
subtitle: "Really What is a Data Scientist?"
description: "When having conversations about data and analytics teams the new fad is hiring Data Scientist, but I find that most people don't know what that means and most people we call Data Scientist are not."
header-img: "img/Data-Scientist-Spectrum.jpg"
authors:
    -
        name: "Seth Dobrin"
        githubProfile : "dr-seth"
        twitterHandle : "sdobrin"
        avatarUrl : "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/9697696?v=3"
tags: [data Scientist, Data, analytics]
---
Reposted from[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/what-makes-data-scientist-part-1-seth-dobrin?trk=prof-post)

When having conversations about data and analytics teams the new fad is
hiring Data Scientist, but I find that most people don't know what that
means and most people we call Data Scientist are not.  Typically,
individuals who are called Data Scientist fall into one of three camps.
The first and least prevalent, she really is a Data Scientist. The second,
she is a database engineer, architect or data analyst. And the third, she
is a statistician or mathematician. That's not to say that the two later
camps can't become Data Scientist, but to do so requires a willingness to
learn and take risks as well as an investment in time by the individual
and their employer.

So what is a Data Scientist? She is an individual who possesses domain
knowledge in a relevant area, a spectrum of skills and experiences that
range from raw data architecture thru to what I will call data journalism.
Perhaps even more importantly this breadth of skills and experiences needs
to be with modern, relevant technologies and techniques. These skills and
experiences are as follows and in future posts I will dig into what each
of these mean and why some combination of them are required. The specific
categories of skills and experiences are as follows: database architecture
& engineering, data intake & transformation, ontology & metadata,
statistical transformation & analytics foundation, descriptive analytics &
reporting, model-based analytics and finally data journalism. Data
scientist are the data and analytics version of an Agile Development team
member with E-shaped skills. This means she should have a depth of skills
in 2-3 areas, a breadth of skills that spans most of the gamut and the
ability to execute. If you have separate data and analytics teams in your
organization, you need data scientist in both organizations. Where her
depth of their skills lies determines which group she belongs in with
descriptive analytics & reporting being the break point between a data
team and an analytics team.

As mentioned above the skills and experiences need to be with relevant and
modern technologies and techniques. What do I mean by this, a Data
Scientist posses an understanding of legacy type platforms such as
relation databases (RDBMS), data warehouses (DW) and she is able to manage
processes such as extract, transform and load (ETL). Additionally, she
will have a foundation in traditional supervised and unsupervised
statistical methods. While these are valuable skills and an important part
of her toolbox they are only the beginning. Her toolbox should also
consist of an understand and depth of skill in the so called Not Only SQL
or NoSQL platforms. Theses include Columnar Data stores, Document stores,
Key-value stores, Graph Databases, and finally Multi-model databases.  On
the more modern analytics skill, this is where the techniques of machine
learning, neural networks and operational research among others come in.
To leverage most of these modern tools, she needs to know at least one
(preferably more) programming language either Python, R, Java or Scala. 
All of these skills and experiences should be on web-scale, cloud-based
environments.

Wow what a list and what an expectation! Again it is important to remember
that very few people if any will be a master of the entire spectrum let
alone all these platforms and techniques. What is important is that anyone
you call a Data Scientist has a breadth of skills and experiences that
span from data architecture to data journalism with depth in at least 2-3
areas. As technologies change it is important that they be a learner so
they can maintain their understanding of relevant technologies.
